Add File Handling article (#3937)
GoogleChrome/web.dev: src/site/content/en/blog/file-handling/index.md

---

> title: Give web applications a way to register their ability to handle files

Author: ```suggestion
title: Let web applications be file handlers
```

subhead: Register an app as a file handler with the operating system.
authors:
  - thomassteiner
Description: |
  Register an app as a file handler with the operating system
  and open files with their proper app.

> date: 2020-09-24
> updated: 2020-09-24

Author: ```suggestion
date: 2020-09-25
# updated: 2020-09-25
```

---

> title: Open files with their proper app

Author: ```suggestion
title: Give web applications a way to register their ability to handle files
```

> title: Open files with their proper app

Author: What do you think about the new title?

> title: Open files with their proper app

Reviewer: It gets the point of view right. I think think you can be pithier: "Let web applications be file handlers".

> title: Open files with their proper app

Author: This is it :-) Thank you!

subhead: Register an app as a file handler with the operating system.
authors:
  - thomassteiner
Description: |
  Register an app as a file handler with the operating system
  and open files with their proper app.
date: 2020-09-24
updated: 2020-09-24
tags:
  - blog
  - file-handling
hero: hero.jpg
alt: Binders in many colors.
origin_trial:
  url:
---

{% Aside %} The File Handling API is part of the
[capabilities project](https://web.dev/fugu-status/) and is currently in development. This post will
be updated as the implementation progresses. {% endAside %}

> ## What is the File Handling API? {: #what }

Author: This comes straight from our [template](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1-yPBCOQcXczf7j9Hn47Ui4Cxqfslkln39rgIWD-AJK0/edit).

> ## What is the File Handling API? {: #what }

Reviewer: I'll talk to Pete about it.

Now that web apps are [capable of reading and writing files](/file-system-access/), the next logical
step is to let developers declare these very web apps as file handlers for the files their apps can
create and process. The File Handling API allows you to do exactly this.

### Suggested use cases for the File Handling API {: #use-cases }

Examples of sites that may use this API include:

- Office applications like word editors, spreadsheet apps, and slideshow creators.
- Graphics editors and drawing tools.

> - Game level design tools.

Author: [Video game level editor](https://www.careerexplorer.com/careers/video-game-level-editor/#:~:text=A%20video%20game%20level%20editor%20creates%20the%20interactive%20architecture%20for,and%20variations%20that%20are%20needed.).

> - Game level design tools.

Reviewer: Oh, a level in a game. Duh. I'm not a gamer.

## Current status {: #status }

<div class="w-table-wrapper">

| Step                                     | Status                   |
| ---------------------------------------- | ------------------------ |
| 1. Create explainer                      | [Complete][explainer]    |
| 2. Create initial draft of specification | Not started              |
| 3. Gather feedback & iterate on design   | [In progress](#feedback) |
| 4. Origin trial                          | Not started              |
| 5. Launch                                | Not started              |

</div>

## How to use the File Handling API {: #use }

### Enabling via chrome://flags

To experiment with the File Handling API locally, without an origin trial token, enable the
`#file-handling-api` flag in `chrome://flags`.

### Enabling support during the origin trial phase

Starting in Chrome&nbsp;⛔️, the File Handling API will be available as an origin trial in Chrome.

> The origin trial is expected to end in Chrome&nbsp;⛔️ (⛔️, 2020).

Author: Yepp, versions pending.

learn more in an article series on this very site on
[making your app installable](/progressive-web-apps/#installable). {% endAside %}

### The imperative part of the File Handling API

Now that the app has declared what files it can handle at which in-scope URL in theory, it needs to
imperatively do something with incoming files in practice. This is where the `launchQueue` comes
into play. To access launched files, a site needs to specify a consumer for a `launchQueue` object
attached to `window`. Launches are queued until they are handled by this consumer, which is invoked
exactly once for each launch. In this manner, every launch is handled, regardless of when the
consumer was specified.

```js
if ('launchQueue' in window) {
  launchQueue.setConsumer((launchParams) => {
    // Nothing to do when the queue is empty.
    if (!launchParams.files.length) {
      return;
    }
    for (const fileHandle of launchParams.files) {
      // Handle the file.
    }
  });
}
```

### DevTools support

There is no DevTools support at the time of this writing, but I have filed a
[feature request](https://bugs.chromium.org/p/chromium/issues/detail?id=1130552) for support to be
added.

## Demo

> I have added File Handling support to [Excalidraw][demo], a cartoon-style drawing app. When you

Reviewer: ```suggestion
I have added file handling support to [Excalidraw][demo], a cartoon-style drawing app. When you
```

> create a file with it and store it somewhere on your file system, you can now open the file via a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
create a file with it and store it somewhere on your file system, you can open the file via a
```

> double click, or a right click and then selecting "Excalidraw" in the context menu. You can check

Reviewer: ```suggestion
double click, or a right click and then select "Excalidraw" in the context menu. You can check
```

out the [implementation][demo-source] in the source code.

<figure class="w-figure">
  <img class="w-screenshot w-screenshot--filled"
       src="./finder.png"
       alt="The macOS finder window with an Excalidraw file." width="1764 " height="930">
  <figcaption class="w-figcaption">
     Double click or right click a file in your operating system's file explorer.
  </figcaption>
</figure>

<figure class="w-figure">
  <img class="w-screenshot w-screenshot--filled"
       src="./context-menu.png"
       alt="The context menu that appears when right clicking a file with the 'Open with… Excalidraw' item highlighted." width="488" height="266">
  <figcaption class="w-figcaption">
     Excalidraw is the default file handler for <code>.excalidraw</code> files.
  </figcaption>
</figure>

## Security and permissions

The Chrome team has designed and implemented the File Handling API using the core principles defined
in [Controlling Access to Powerful Web Platform Features][powerful-apis], including user control,
transparency, and ergonomics.

### File-related challenges

> There is a large category of attack vectors that are opened up by allowing websites access to files.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There is a large category of attack vectors that are opened by allowing websites access to files.
```

These are outlined in the
[article on the File System Access API](/file-system-access/#security-considerations). The
additional security-pertinent capability that the File Handling API provides over the File System
Access API is the ability to grant access to certain files through the operating system's built-in
UI, as opposed to through a file picker shown by a web application. Any restrictions as to the files
and folders that can be opened via the picker will also be applied to the files and folders opened
via the operating system.

There is still a risk that users may unintentionally grant a web application access to a file by
opening it. However, it is generally understood that opening a file allows the application it is
opened with to read and/or manipulate that file. Therefore, a user's explicit choice to open a file
in an installed application, such as via an "Open with…" context menu, can be read as a sufficient
signal of trust in the application.

### Default handler challenges

> The exception to this is where there are no existing applications installed on the host operating
> system capable of handling a given file type. In this case, some host operating systems may

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The exception to this is when there are no applications on the host system for a given file
type. In this case, some host operating systems may
```

> automatically promote the newly registered handler to become the default handler for that file type,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
automatically promote the newly registered handler to the default handler for that file type,
```

silently and without any intervention by the user. This would mean if the user double clicks a file
of that type, it would automatically open in the registered web app. On such host operating systems,
when the user agent determines that there is no existing default handler for the file type, an
explicit permission prompt might be necessary to avoid accidentally sending the contents of a file
to a web application without the user's consent.

### User control

Browsers should not register every site that can handle files as a file handler. Instead,
registration should be gated behind installation and never happen without explicit user

> confirmation, and especially if a site is to become the default handler.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
confirmation, especially if a site is to become the default handler.
```
